This is the README file for ellspmv, a program for benchmarking sparse
marix-vector multiplication (SpMV) for matrices in ELLPACK format.

  Copyright (C) 2022 James D. Trotter

  Copying and distribution of this file, with or without modification,
  are permitted in any medium without royalty provided the copyright
  notice and this notice are preserved.

Building
--------

The ellspmv program can be built with `make'. Compilation and linking
may be configured through the environment variable `CC', which is used
to choose a compiler, and `CFLAGS' and `LDFLAGS', which are used to
set compiler flags and linker flags, respectively. Here is an example:

     make CC=gcc CFLAGS="-O3 -march=native"

Usage
-----

ellspmv is used to load a matrix from a file in Matrix Market format
(see https://math.nist.gov/MatrixMarket/formats.html), convert it to
ELLPACK representation, and multiply it with a dense vector where
every element is set to one.

Since OpenMP is used for shared-memory parallel computations, the
environment variable `OMP_NUM_THREADS' can be set to control the
number of threads that are used. In addition, `OMP_PROC_BIND' can be
set to bind threads to particular cores.

If the option `--verbose' is supplied, then some information about the
matrix is printed, as well as the information about the matrix-vector
multiplication, such as the time spent and number of arithmetic
operations performed.

Here is an example from a dual socket Intel Xeon Gold 6130 CPU system,
where AVX-512 is used for vectorisation. First, we compile the code
with GCC 11.2.0. Using the option `-fopt-info-vec', we get some extra
information that shows where vectorization is applied:

	    $ make CC=gcc-11 CFLAGS="-march=native -O3 -fopt-info-vec -ffast-math -mprefer-vector-width=512 -fopenmp -DWITH_OPENMP"
	    gcc-11 -c -march=native -O3 -fopt-info-vec -ffast-math -mprefer-vector-width=512 -fopenmp -DWITH_OPENMP ellspmv.c -o ellspmv.o
	    ellspmv.c:773:44: optimized: loop vectorized using 64 byte vectors
	    ellspmv.c:773:44: optimized: loop vectorized using 32 byte vectors
	    ellspmv.c:548:14: optimized: loop vectorized using 64 byte vectors
	    ellspmv.c:548:14: optimized: loop vectorized using 32 byte vectors
	    ellspmv.c:525:27: optimized: loop vectorized using 64 byte vectors
	    ellspmv.c:525:27: optimized: loop vectorized using 32 byte vectors
	    ellspmv.c:501:35: optimized: loop vectorized using 64 byte vectors
	    ellspmv.c:501:35: optimized: loop vectorized using 32 byte vectors
	    ellspmv.c:710:13: optimized: basic block part vectorized using 64 byte vectors
	    ellspmv.c:735:13: optimized: basic block part vectorized using 64 byte vectors
	    ellspmv.c:735:13: optimized: basic block part vectorized using 64 byte vectors
	    ellspmv.c:791:13: optimized: basic block part vectorized using 64 byte vectors
	    gcc-11 -march=native -O3 -fopt-info-vec -ffast-math -mprefer-vector-width=512 -fopenmp -DWITH_OPENMP ellspmv.o  -o ellspmv

Next, we test the matrix-vector multiplication on a large matrix with
16 nonzeros per row. With standard OpenMP environment variables, we
use 32 threads and pin each thread to its own CPU core:

    $ OMP_PROC_BIND=true OMP_PLACES=cores OMP_NUM_THREADS=32 ./ellspmv --repeat=10 --verbose Lynx68_reordered/Lynx68_reordered.mtx
    mtxfile_read: 32.034946 seconds (99.7 MB/s)
    ell_from_coo: 0.772920 seconds, 6,810,586 rows, 115,779,962 nonzeros, 16 nonzeros per row
    gemv16: 0.011727 seconds (9.5 Gnz/s, 19.7 Gflop/s, 125.4 GB/s)
    gemv16: 0.009932 seconds (11.2 Gnz/s, 23.3 Gflop/s, 148.1 GB/s)
    gemv16: 0.009946 seconds (11.2 Gnz/s, 23.3 Gflop/s, 147.9 GB/s)
    gemv16: 0.010174 seconds (11.0 Gnz/s, 22.8 Gflop/s, 144.6 GB/s)
    gemv16: 0.009940 seconds (11.2 Gnz/s, 23.3 Gflop/s, 148.0 GB/s)
    gemv16: 0.009886 seconds (11.3 Gnz/s, 23.4 Gflop/s, 148.8 GB/s)
    gemv16: 0.009950 seconds (11.2 Gnz/s, 23.3 Gflop/s, 147.9 GB/s)
    gemv16: 0.009953 seconds (11.2 Gnz/s, 23.3 Gflop/s, 147.8 GB/s)
    gemv16: 0.010049 seconds (11.1 Gnz/s, 23.0 Gflop/s, 146.4 GB/s)
    gemv16: 0.010111 seconds (11.0 Gnz/s, 22.9 Gflop/s, 145.5 GB/s)

The matrix-vector multiplication kernel achieves a throughput of about
148 GB/s, which is about 58% of the 256 GB/s theoretical memory
bandwidth of this system.

Copying
-------
ellspmv is free software. See the file COPYING for copying conditions.
